# MD-Housing-Data
VT Data Analytics &amp; Visualization Capstone Project

Data Collection: I collected my data from the Federal Housing Finance Agency House Price Index and the Maryland State Data Center – Department of Planning.  Both sites provided a CSV file that contained the respective datasets. The data from the FHFA House Price Index had 8 columns and 16591 rows of data, while the data from the Maryland State Data Center – Department of Planning dataset had 358 columns and 25 rows of data on the DP02_Social_County_ACS_2016-2020 tab and 2 columns and 358 rows on the Demo_metadata tab. I only utilized the “DP02_Social_County_ACS_2016-2020” and the “Demo_metadata” tabs from the Maryland State Data Center – Department of Planning dataset. After downloading both datasets, I reviewed and cleaned both files using Excel, Python, and SQL. I deleted rows that contained summary information that was unnecessary for my analysis. I also filtered the dataset so that it only contained data for Maryland counties. I dropped columns that were not useful for my project such as metrics on other ethnicities that contained fewer Maryland citizens. I replaced column headers so that it reflected ethnicities as opposed to the numeric alias that was originally assigned to each ethnicity within the Maryland State Data Center – Department of Planning dataset.  I identified 46 rows of null values and replaced them with the median value of each column. The reason I filled the null values from each column with the median value is due to the large outliers from the 2021 data. Considering that the housing market was producing high appreciation rates at historical levels in 2021, the data would have been somewhat skewed if I used the mean. However, I will only be including data from 2015-2020 due to the irregularity of the 2021 data. After cleaning each dataset, I joined them together using SQL. Lastly, I used Python and Tableau to identify common trends amongst the data to discover the correlation between race and house price index.

Project Summary: Considering that I work as a Data Analyst in the housing industry, I have gained a lot of insight into homeownership and the importance of it. Homeownership is a financially important asset that is key to wealth. However, homeownership is not as accessible in areas like underserved communities. Furthermore, housing located in underserved communities is sometimes valued less than housing located elsewhere. As a result, I was interested in analyzing the correlation between race and house price index for my project. Considering that most people get their wealth from homeownership and that there is a continuous wealth gap between African Americans and Caucasian people, my intended audience is for minorities residing in Maryland. It is my hope that my target audience is able to have a better understanding on the importance of homeownership and to be able to identify the best county to reside in within Maryland based on the HPI. 

To conduct my analysis, I leveraged Tableau and Python. I began my analysis by identifying basic trends such as examining the counties that had the highest average house price index. After further evaluation, I discovered that Montgomery County has the highest house price index, followed by Baltimore City, Anne Arundel County, Howard County, and Carroll County. Whereas, Somerset County has the lowest house price index followed by Garett County, Kent County, Caroline County, and St. Mary’s County. I then wanted to get a better understanding of the racial makeup of the top and bottom five counties by house price index. After further analysis, I discovered that the top five ethnicities in Maryland are Asian, Black, Some other race, Two or more races, and White. Furthermore, I found that Montgomery County, the county with the highest house price index, has more white residents than the other ethnicities listed above. To explore this discovery in more detail, I leveraged Python to identify the correlation coefficients between the house price index and each ethnicity. The correlation coefficient table and matrix revealed that there is a higher positive correlation between the house price index and white residents compared to the other ethnicities. The correlation coefficient for the house price index and white residents was 0.951434, while there is a 2-3% difference in correlation between the house price index and the other ethnicities. More specifically, black residents have a correlation coefficient of 0.929027, having the fourth highest positive correlation to the house price index out of the other ethnicities. Based on additional research conducted, this finding did not surprise me as homes in white neighborhoods have appreciated in value by about $200,000 more than similar homes in communities of color over a 40-year time span1. This information led me to briefly examine the relationship between the house price index and annual change. As a result, I created a line graph using the average house price index and the average annual change for the top and bottom five counties by house price index. This graph demonstrated that although Montgomery County may have the highest house price index, it has the second to lowest annual change rate from the respective counties. Furthermore, despite Somerset County having the lowest house price index, it has one of the highest annual change rates from the respective counties. Thus, those who may be looking to fix and flip a property might profit better in a county like Somerset County due to its low house price index and its higher annual change rate. However, those who may be looking for a house that has more value might want to consider a county like Montgomery County. Unfortunately, picking a house in the right county is half the battle for people of color as the other challenge comes from appraisal bias. Ultimately, appraisers determine the value of our homes. Thus, it is important for people of color to find a house that is located in a financially valuable neighborhood and to know the home values in the neighborhoods that they choose to live in. This knowledge will allow homeowners to better recognize appraisal bias if it occurs. If one experiences appraisal bias, be sure to file a complaint with the Department of Housing and Urban Development or report housing discrimination to your state.

